README.md, before:

# Prometheus Enviro Sensors

## About

This is a small python daemon (and some sample configuration) that plumbs some environment sensor modules that are suitable for use with a Raspberry Pi to the Prometheus monitoring system, which can log and graph the data.

This is absolutely a quick hack, to set expectations. But I did document it, so it's got that going for it.

### Screenshot

This is the console provided by the configuration below:

![Screenshot of sensor graphs](console-screenshot.png)

### Supported sensors

- [SGP30](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/sgp30-air-quality-sensor-breakout) air quality sensor (eCO/2, TVOC)
  - This one is useful over the other "air quality" sensors because it actually gives calibrated CO/2 readings, even if "equivalent", rather than an arbitrary "quality" scale.
- [BME280](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/bme280-breakout) (temperature, pressure, humidity)

Note that it does *not* currently support all the sensors in the Pimoroni [Enviro](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/enviro) HAT, just the BME280, although it should be easy enough to add (the name is perhaps a little aspirational). I just don't have the hardware to test (or, thus, much inclination). I would suspect that having both this and the code running the display read the sensors at the same time would work poorly, though. If you have the actual hat, it may be easier to hack *that* to export to Prometheus, than hack *this* to co-exist.

If you want to use the modules above, it's probably easier to plug them into Pimoroni's [breakout garden](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/breakout-garden-hat-i2c-spi) (there are versions for most Pi variants now). Then everything just plugs together, which is nice.

## Setup

This lists every step to get this set up on Debian (including Raspbian). If you already have a Prometheus setup, skip parts as needed.

Start by `git clone` or download/unzip -ing this repository somewhere first, of course.

### Install Prometheus

```shell
sudo apt install --no-install-recommends prometheus
```

Avoiding the recommended dependencies avoids installing a daemon set up for collecting system information, which you presumably do not care about.

### Install the sensor libraries

> **Caution:** Python is kinda in a mess about the 2 to 3 migration, *still.* If getting dependencies via Debian packages, make sure you're consistent about if you install `3` versions. If using pip, make sure you're consistent about using `pip` or `pip3`. The provided systemd file below assumes you're explicitly using Python 3.

See the Pimoroni instructions for each sensor module; they provide install scripts or `pip install` targets.

Alternatively, if you're wary of random scripts cluttering your system, it's good enough to `git clone` or download/unzip the libraries and symlink them to next to this daemon.

### "Configure" prometheus-enviro-sensors

Since anything configurable is currently a TODO, if you don't have exactly the set of sensors supported, or want to listen on a different port, edit `prometheus-enviro-sensors.py` and comment parts out to taste.

### Configure systemd

This will start the daemon automatically as a systemd service, and let it deal with running it in the background.

Copy or symlink `prometheus-enviro-sensors.service` to `/etc/systemd/system`. Edit it to point to where you put `prometheus-enviro-sensors.py`. If you're not using the default `pi` user, change the `User=` line. You could also make a dedicated user account to run it under, if you want. It doesn't need `root` privileges.

Enable and start the service:

```shell
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable prometheus-enviro-sensors.service
sudo systemctl start prometheus-enviro-sensors.service 
sudo systemctl status prometheus-enviro-sensors.service
```

It should report `active (running)`. If you open <http://localhost:9092/> in a browser (or the IP address of the computer you're running the service on), you should get a text response of sensor values.

> **To uninstall or deactivate,** use `systemctl stop` and `systemctl disable`. The former will kill the daemon and leave the sensors/GPIO interface free to be used by other processes. The latter will remove the configuration that makes it start on boot.

### Configure Prometheus

#### Scrape config

Edit `/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml`.

If you're just using this for the sensors, I recommend changing the `scrape_config` for `prometheus` to have a much longer `scrape_interval` and `scrape_timeout`. If you comment out Debian's defaults, and also the ones it sets under `global`, this will be the Prometheus default of one minute, which'll do. This just needlessly stores information about Prometheus' own health and performance, which you presumably don't care much about. Making this much more than a couple of minutes will mess up its own graphing, though.

You can also comment out the `node` job, unless you installed with recommended dependencies and want the system monitoring.

Add a new job for the sensors:

```yaml
- job_name: 'enviro-sensors'
  scrape_interval: 1s
  scrape_timeout: 1s
  static_configs:
    - targets: ['localhost:9092']
  relabel_configs:
    - source_labels: [__address__]
      regex: 'localhost:9092'
      target_label: instance
      replacement: 'lounge'
```

Change `lounge` to wherever your sensor is. This will give it a more useful instance name, especially if you later want to have one Prometheus server pulling in sensor data from Pi Zeros in different locations around your home or something.

Get Prometheus to reload its configuration:

```shell
sudo systemctl reload-or-restart prometheus
```

You should now be able to go to <http://localhost:9090/> (or the IP address of the computer you're setting this up on) and see the Prometheus interface. If you type `sgp30_co2_ppm` into the query box and hit `Execute` you should see a result, then click `Graph` and be able to graph it.

You can also check `Status` then `Targets` in the menu, where you should see that your `enviro-sensors` instance is `UP`.

#### Retention period

Edit `/etc/default/prometheus`, and add something like `--storage.tsdb.retention=3y` to the `ARGS` value. See the comments in that file for other options.

Note that Prometheus isn't *really* intended for long-term metrics storage. The default is 15 days. But for small data sets like this, you can probably get away with it.

Changing this will require you to *restart* Prometheus:

```shell
sudo systemctl restart prometheus
```

#### Console

On Debian, see <https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=855145>; you will want to copy and `gunzip` the `console_libraries` (and possibly `consoles`; you can symlink those).

Somewhere to your choosing in `menu.lib`:

```html
  <li {{ if eq .Path "env-sensors.html" }}class="prom_lhs_menu_selected"{{ end }}><a href="env-sensors.html?instance=lounge">Env. sensors</a></li>
```

Update `lounge` to match the instance name you used above.

(This is a bit of a hack, and doesn't bother supporting multiple sensor sets. See how the console for Prometheus itself does it; you'll need a page with a list of them. You can't use the default `_menuItem` template with a query argument because the golang 'safe' filtering will choke on it and generate a weird `#ZgotmplZ` fragID instead.)

Copy or link `env-sensors.htm` into `/etc/prometheus/consoles`.

Now you should be able to go to <http://localhost:9090/consoles/prometheus.html>, then use the navigation at the top left to look at your sensors as graphs. This is particularly handy from some *other* computer. Use the time controls at the bottom to see how air properties change throughout the day.

## TODO

There is absolutely no guarantee I'll ever get to any of this. It's an idea dumping ground.

- Flag parsing to toggle features on and off.
- Proper `/etc/defaults/` `$ARGV` for the systemd unit to handle flags.
- Sensor support by flag.
- STDOUT tracing by flag.
- Support more of the environmental sensors, like the relevant EnviroHat ones.
  - [LTR-559](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/ltr-559-light-proximity-sensor-breakout) (light, proximity)
  - [MICS6814](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/mics6814-gas-sensor-breakout) (CO, NO2, NH3)
- Allow using the CPU temperature compensation logic that's in the examples for the BME280, for setups that have the board mounted directly over it. (I use a short GPIO ribbon cable.)
- For that matter, implement `vcgencmd measure_temp` as an optional sensor, so it can be compensated for Prometheus-side with a computed metric if desired.
- Configurable Prometheus metrics port instead of hardcoding 9092.
- Optionally allow the stock Python metrics.
- Bother to set up the console to support multiple instances.
- Suggest some Prometheus alerts, like high CO/2 concentrations.

Bugs/nits:

- The stderr messages *should* be going into the journal that `systemctl status` shows snippets from, but seem to be getting lost. This doesn't really matter since it's just startup messages.
- The SGP30 seems to really drop its readings to the minimum values incredibly when restarted, taking a while to climb back up to where it was. I guess this might just be a hardware thing, but it kinda sucks. The startup code here is the same as the example, which does it too.

Really scope-creepy stuff:

- Log to rrdtool as well, for more suitable long-term storage with downsampling.
- Show metrics or possibly Prometheus alerts on mini breakout garden displays like the [ST7789](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/1-3-spi-colour-lcd-240x240-breakout). For example, have an alert suggest an image and a priority as labels, and if there are any, show the highest one and the metric value, else keep the screen backlight off.

## License

Licensed under the [EUPL-1.2-or-later](https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/eupl/eupl-text-eupl-12).
(See [GitHub's summary of its terms](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/eupl-1.2/) if unfamiliar. It's a strong copyleft open source license like the Affero GPL.)

Commit message:

Add some references about the SGP30 behaviour
A little search reveals that it's losing its calibration because it wants its baseline value saved/restored, which this daemon could totally do.

README.md, after:

# Prometheus Enviro Sensors

## About

This is a small python daemon (and some sample configuration) that plumbs some environment sensor modules that are suitable for use with a Raspberry Pi to the Prometheus monitoring system, which can log and graph the data.

This is absolutely a quick hack, to set expectations. But I did document it, so it's got that going for it.

### Screenshot

This is the console provided by the configuration below:

![Screenshot of sensor graphs](console-screenshot.png)

### Supported sensors

- [SGP30](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/sgp30-air-quality-sensor-breakout) air quality sensor (eCO/2, TVOC)
  - This one is useful over the other "air quality" sensors because it actually gives calibrated CO/2 readings, even if "equivalent", rather than an arbitrary "quality" scale.
- [BME280](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/bme280-breakout) (temperature, pressure, humidity)

Note that it does *not* currently support all the sensors in the Pimoroni [Enviro](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/enviro) HAT, just the BME280, although it should be easy enough to add (the name is perhaps a little aspirational). I just don't have the hardware to test (or, thus, much inclination). I would suspect that having both this and the code running the display read the sensors at the same time would work poorly, though. If you have the actual hat, it may be easier to hack *that* to export to Prometheus, than hack *this* to co-exist.

If you want to use the modules above, it's probably easier to plug them into Pimoroni's [breakout garden](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/breakout-garden-hat-i2c-spi) (there are versions for most Pi variants now). Then everything just plugs together, which is nice.

## Setup

This lists every step to get this set up on Debian (including Raspbian). If you already have a Prometheus setup, skip parts as needed.

Start by `git clone` or download/unzip -ing this repository somewhere first, of course.

### Install Prometheus

```shell
sudo apt install --no-install-recommends prometheus
```

Avoiding the recommended dependencies avoids installing a daemon set up for collecting system information, which you presumably do not care about.

### Install the sensor libraries

> **Caution:** Python is kinda in a mess about the 2 to 3 migration, *still.* If getting dependencies via Debian packages, make sure you're consistent about if you install `3` versions. If using pip, make sure you're consistent about using `pip` or `pip3`. The provided systemd file below assumes you're explicitly using Python 3.

See the Pimoroni instructions for each sensor module; they provide install scripts or `pip install` targets.

Alternatively, if you're wary of random scripts cluttering your system, it's good enough to `git clone` or download/unzip the libraries and symlink them to next to this daemon.

### "Configure" prometheus-enviro-sensors

Since anything configurable is currently a TODO, if you don't have exactly the set of sensors supported, or want to listen on a different port, edit `prometheus-enviro-sensors.py` and comment parts out to taste.

### Configure systemd

This will start the daemon automatically as a systemd service, and let it deal with running it in the background.

Copy or symlink `prometheus-enviro-sensors.service` to `/etc/systemd/system`. Edit it to point to where you put `prometheus-enviro-sensors.py`. If you're not using the default `pi` user, change the `User=` line. You could also make a dedicated user account to run it under, if you want. It doesn't need `root` privileges.

Enable and start the service:

```shell
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable prometheus-enviro-sensors.service
sudo systemctl start prometheus-enviro-sensors.service 
sudo systemctl status prometheus-enviro-sensors.service
```

It should report `active (running)`. If you open <http://localhost:9092/> in a browser (or the IP address of the computer you're running the service on), you should get a text response of sensor values.

> **To uninstall or deactivate,** use `systemctl stop` and `systemctl disable`. The former will kill the daemon and leave the sensors/GPIO interface free to be used by other processes. The latter will remove the configuration that makes it start on boot.

### Configure Prometheus

#### Scrape config

Edit `/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml`.

If you're just using this for the sensors, I recommend changing the `scrape_config` for `prometheus` to have a much longer `scrape_interval` and `scrape_timeout`. If you comment out Debian's defaults, and also the ones it sets under `global`, this will be the Prometheus default of one minute, which'll do. This just needlessly stores information about Prometheus' own health and performance, which you presumably don't care much about. Making this much more than a couple of minutes will mess up its own graphing, though.

You can also comment out the `node` job, unless you installed with recommended dependencies and want the system monitoring.

Add a new job for the sensors:

```yaml
- job_name: 'enviro-sensors'
  scrape_interval: 1s
  scrape_timeout: 1s
  static_configs:
    - targets: ['localhost:9092']
  relabel_configs:
    - source_labels: [__address__]
      regex: 'localhost:9092'
      target_label: instance
      replacement: 'lounge'
```

Change `lounge` to wherever your sensor is. This will give it a more useful instance name, especially if you later want to have one Prometheus server pulling in sensor data from Pi Zeros in different locations around your home or something.

Get Prometheus to reload its configuration:

```shell
sudo systemctl reload-or-restart prometheus
```

You should now be able to go to <http://localhost:9090/> (or the IP address of the computer you're setting this up on) and see the Prometheus interface. If you type `sgp30_co2_ppm` into the query box and hit `Execute` you should see a result, then click `Graph` and be able to graph it.

You can also check `Status` then `Targets` in the menu, where you should see that your `enviro-sensors` instance is `UP`.

#### Retention period

Edit `/etc/default/prometheus`, and add something like `--storage.tsdb.retention=3y` to the `ARGS` value. See the comments in that file for other options.

Note that Prometheus isn't *really* intended for long-term metrics storage. The default is 15 days. But for small data sets like this, you can probably get away with it.

Changing this will require you to *restart* Prometheus:

```shell
sudo systemctl restart prometheus
```

#### Console

On Debian, see <https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=855145>; you will want to copy and `gunzip` the `console_libraries` (and possibly `consoles`; you can symlink those).

Somewhere to your choosing in `menu.lib`:

```html
  <li {{ if eq .Path "env-sensors.html" }}class="prom_lhs_menu_selected"{{ end }}><a href="env-sensors.html?instance=lounge">Env. sensors</a></li>
```

Update `lounge` to match the instance name you used above.

(This is a bit of a hack, and doesn't bother supporting multiple sensor sets. See how the console for Prometheus itself does it; you'll need a page with a list of them. You can't use the default `_menuItem` template with a query argument because the golang 'safe' filtering will choke on it and generate a weird `#ZgotmplZ` fragID instead.)

Copy or link `env-sensors.htm` into `/etc/prometheus/consoles`.

Now you should be able to go to <http://localhost:9090/consoles/prometheus.html>, then use the navigation at the top left to look at your sensors as graphs. This is particularly handy from some *other* computer. Use the time controls at the bottom to see how air properties change throughout the day.

## TODO

There is absolutely no guarantee I'll ever get to any of this. It's an idea dumping ground. Pull requests welcome though.

- Flag parsing to toggle features on and off.
- Proper `/etc/defaults/` `$ARGV` for the systemd unit to handle flags.
- Sensor support by flag.
- STDOUT tracing by flag.
- The SGP30 really wants a baseline value saved and restored when monitoring is interrupted, which is something the daemon could do on startup/shutdown, otherwise it takes up to 12 hours to recover properly. (This is very visible as readings plummeting down to minimums on a daemon restart.) See [discussion about it on the Adafruit forums](https://forums.adafruit.com/viewtopic.php?f=19&t=133097#p661509). The example code doesn't do this, but [the library has the methods for it](https://github.com/pimoroni/sgp30-python/blob/master/library/sgp30/__init__.py#L165).
- Support more of the environmental sensors, like the relevant EnviroHat ones.
  - [LTR-559](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/ltr-559-light-proximity-sensor-breakout) (light, proximity)
  - [MICS6814](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/mics6814-gas-sensor-breakout) (CO, NO2, NH3)
- Allow using the CPU temperature compensation logic that's in the examples for the BME280, for setups that have the board mounted directly over it. (I use a short GPIO ribbon cable.)
- For that matter, implement `vcgencmd measure_temp` as an optional sensor, so it can be compensated for Prometheus-side with a computed metric if desired.
- Configurable Prometheus metrics port instead of hardcoding 9092.
- Optionally allow the stock Python metrics.
- Bother to set up the console to support multiple instances.
- Suggest some Prometheus alerts, like high CO/2 concentrations.

Bugs/nits:

- The stderr messages *should* be going into the journal that `systemctl status` shows snippets from, but seem to be getting lost. This doesn't really matter since it's just startup messages.

Really scope-creepy stuff:

- Log to rrdtool as well, for more suitable long-term storage with downsampling.
- Show metrics or possibly Prometheus alerts on mini breakout garden displays like the [ST7789](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/1-3-spi-colour-lcd-240x240-breakout). For example, have an alert suggest an image and a priority as labels, and if there are any, show the highest one and the metric value, else keep the screen backlight off. This should be a separate process.

## License

Licensed under the [EUPL-1.2-or-later](https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/eupl/eupl-text-eupl-12).
(See [GitHub's summary of its terms](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/eupl-1.2/) if unfamiliar. It's a strong copyleft open source license like the Affero GPL.)
